Rees, Martin. *Our Final Hour: A Scientist's Warning: How Terror, Error, and Environmental Disaster Threaten Humankind's Future in This Century--On Earth and Beyond*. New York: Basic Books, 2003.

8:  "I think the odds are no better than fifty-fifty that our present civilization on Earth will survive to the end of the present century. Our choices and actions could ensure the perpetual future of life (not just on Earth, but perhaps far beyond it, too). Or in contrast, through malign intent, or through misadventure, twenty-first century technology could jeopardise life's potential, foreclosing its human and posthuman future. What happens here on Earth, in this century, could conceivably make the difference between a near eternity filled with ever more complex and subtle forms of life and one filled with nothing but base matter."

as is typical of the genre, Rees confuses life as such with human life. Furthermore, Rees does not say why a future with (human) life is preferable to a future without (human) life. The entire genre of "existential risk" begs the question.

13:  "Scientists are often blind to the ramifications of even their own discoveries."

16-7:  "an insect's brain has about the same processing power as a powerful present-day computer."

17:  "Nanotechnology could extend Moore's law for up to thirty further years; by that time, computers would match the processing power of a human brain. And all human beings could by then be bathed in a cyberspace that allows instant communication with one another, not just in speech and vision but via elaborate virtual reality."

this assumes the resolution of massive social, political and economic problems which seems rather unlikely
	
19:  "Belief in the 'singularity' relates to mainstream futurology rather as the millenarian hope of 'Rapture'--being physically plucked up into the Heavens at an imminent Last Day--relates to mainstream Christianity."

20:  "Within fifty years, if our civilisation escapes disastrous setbacks in the meantime, there could be a vibrant programme of human space exploration, though it is likely to be led by entrepreneurs and adventurers rather than by governments."

21:  "technological advances will in themselves render society more vulnerable to disruption."

25-6:  "Throughout most of human history the worst disasters have been inflicted by environmental forces--floods, earthquakes, volcanoes and hurricanes--and by pestilence. But the greatest catastrophes of the twentieth century were directly induced by human agency: one estimate suggests that in the two world wars and their aftermath, 187 million perished by war, massacre, persecution, or policy-induced famine. The twentieth century was perhaps the first during which more were killed by war and totalitarian regimes than by natural disasters. These man-made catastrophes were, however, played out against a backdrop of improving well-being, and not just in privileged countries, but in much of the developing world, where life expectancy at birth almost doubled, and a smaller proportion lived in abject poverty."

42:  "Twenty-first technology confronts us with a diverse array of lethal prospects that were not yet on the horizon during the Cold War era. Moreoever, the potential perpetrators are also more diverse, and more elusive. The prime new threats are 'asymmetric': they come not from nation states but from subnational groups, and even from individuals."

43:  "There will always be disaffected loners in every country, and the 'leverage' that each can exert is increasing. And there are other quite different threats. In cyberspace, for instance, there is a race between attempts to render systems more robust and secure, and the growing ingenuity of criminals who may try to infiltrate and sabotage those systems."

53:  "But this delay [between infection and symptoms] is an attraction to the lone dissident or terrorist, because the provenance of an attack--when or where the pathogen was released--can be readily camouflaged."

61:  "We are entering an era when a single person can, by one clandestine act, cause millions of deaths or render a city uninhabitable for years, and when a malfunction in cyberspace can cause havoc worldwide to a significant segment of the economy: air transport, power generation, or the financial system. Indeed, disaster could be caused by someone who is merely incompetent rather than malign."

62:  "First, the destructive and disruptive capabilities available to an individual trained in genetics, bacteriology, or computer networks will grow as science advances; second, society is becoming more integrated and interdependent (internationally as well as nationally); and third, instant communications mean that the psychological impact of even a local disaster has worldwide repercussions on attitudes and behaviour."

65:  "The zealotry of traditional religious enthusiasts, allied to the single-issue fanaticism and ruthlessness of (for instance) the animal rights extremists in the US and the UK, cana be a threatening mix, especially when accompanied by technical sophistication."

66:  "Future mega-terror could engender, worldwide, this breakdown of community and trust."

66:  "One palliative would be acceptance of a complete loss of privacy, with the development of novel techniques to keep tabs on us all. Universal surveillance is becoming technically feasible, and could plainly be a safeguard against unwelcome clandestine activities. Techniques such as surgically implanted transmitters are already being serious mooted to (for instance) monitor criminals on parole. Subjecting all citizens to such treatment would be deeply unpalatable to most of us, but if the threats escalated, we might become resigned to the need for such measures, and the next generation might find it less repugnant.
"Orwellian surveillance, in traditional totalitarian style, would be plainly acceptable; unless encryption techniques kept pace, it would become ever more intrusive with each technical advance. But suppose the surveillance was two-way, and each of us could 'spy' not only on the government but on everyone else."
	
cites David Brin, *The Transparent Society*
	
77-8:  "Perhaps only a minority react in this disproportionate way against these mouse and rat experiments. However, some procedures that may soon be possible, could trigger such widespread revulsion that there will surely be pressure to ban them: for instance, the 'design' of insentient animals who (it would then be argued) would have the moral status of vegetables and so could be treated appallingly with no ethical compunctions at all. (The food industry would then be relieved of pressure to abandon its cruelly intensive treatment of factory-farmed animals). Brainless hominids whose organs could be harvested as spare parts would seem, ethically, even more problematic. On the other hand, transplanting organs from pigs or other animals into humans should raise no more ethical concerns than meat-eating, though this technique (xenotransplantation) will perhaps be banned--irrespective of ethical judgments--because of the risks that new animal diseases could be introduced into the human population."

102-5:  "Nonetheless, the world plainly could not perpetually support its entire population in the present style of middle-class European and North Americans.
"At the other extreme, a population as high as ten billion would be fully sustainable if everyone lived in tiny apartments, perhaps like the 'capsule hotels' that already exist in Tokyo, subsisting on a rice-based vegetarian diet, electronically networked, travelling little, and finding recreation and fulfilment in virtual reality rather than the consumerism and incessant [103] travel now favoured in the profligate West. Such a lifestyle would be frugal in its demands on energy and natural resources. It need not, however, be incompatible with cultural and technological advance: indeed, the most dramatic engines of current economic growth--miniaturisation and information technology--are environmentally benign.
"For a population to remain in a steady state, women must each have, on average, 2.1 children (the extra 0.1 accounting for children who never reach reproductive age). The fertility rates in many developed countries are well below this. Perhaps surprisingly, Catholic Italy has the lowest rate of all--only 1.2 births per woman. Almost equally low are Greece and Spain, along with Russia and Armenia.
"This drastic reduction in family size is not just a European phenomenon. There are now more than sixty countries where fertility is below replacement level. These include not only China, where there has long been insistent political pressure for 'one-child families,' but other Asian countries such as Japan, Korea, and Thailand, were [sic] there has not been such pressure. And there have been drastic declines elsewhere. For instance, despite the anticontraception policy of the Catholic Church, the fertility rate in Brazil has halved in twenty years, and is now 2.3. In Iran, where the ruling mullahs in the 1990s were openly hostile to the UN's agenda for limiting population growth, women have made their own decisive choices, and the fertility rate has fallen from 5.5 in 1988 to 2.2 today.
"Despite the law birth rate, the population of Europe is still rising, partly because the children of the 'population explosion' are now of childbearing age, and also because of immigration and improved life expectancy. Medical advances and public health measures have extended life expectancy and robustness in all but the most deprived parts of the world.
"Without an intervening catastrophe, world population still [104] seems destined to continue rising until 2050, by which time it will have reached eight billion. This projection follows from the fact that the present age distribution in developing countries is sharply skewed towards the young, so an increase would continue even if these people had less than replacement level of children. This increase, combined with the trend towards urbanisation, will lead to at least twenty 'megacities' with populations exceeding twenty million.
"But the surprisingly rapid fall in fertility, stemming from the empowerment of women, has led the UN to reduce its projections for the second half of the century. The best current guess is that after 2050 the population will start to drop, perhaps falling back to its present-day value by the end of the century, unless medical advances boost life expectancy to the extent that some futurologists predict. The 'over-fifties' will dominate in Europe and North America, even without any novel techniques for extending life span. This trend may be masked, particularly in the US, by immigration from the developing world, where stabilisation and consequent decline (if it happens) will be delayed.
"Of course, the extrapolation is based on assumptions about social trends. If European countries became genuinely anxious about falling population, governments could readily introduce measures to stimulate fertility. Contrariwise, epidemics spreading with megacities could cause catastrophic declines of the kind already projected for parts of Africa, and by 2050 such predictions could be radically changed by technical advances in robotics and medicine as drastic as those that techno-enthusiasts envisage.
"The most benign outcome, if we could indeed survive the next century without catastrophic reversals, would be a world with a population lower than at present (and far below its projected peak around 2050). [105]
"A new hazard that must be folded into these projections, and perhaps a portent of others, is the AIDS epidemic. This didn't catch hold in the human population until the 1980s, and it still hasn't reached its peak. Almost ten percent of South Africa's forty-two million people are believed to be HIV positive: AIDS is predicted to cause seven million deaths by 2010 in that country alone, wiping out much of the most productive age group, cutting the life expectancy of both men and women by as much as twenty years, and leaving millions of traumatised orphans among the younger generation. The burgeoning AIDS pandemic will devastate Africa; millions of cases are projected in Russia; the total number infected are rising fast in China and India, where fatalities from AIDS may exceed African levels within a decade."

Long sections on the risks inherent in scientific experimentation, especially in physics doing various sorts of high energy experiments--colliders, etc. Rather unilluminating: shouldn't curtail science, but should also be clear on the risks. Short discuss of "Doomsday argument" in philosophy. Also unilluminating.

142:  "Twentieth-century advances in understanding atoms, life, and the cosmos rank as humankind's greatest collective intellectual achievement."

149-50: "(The film, *The Terminator*, in which a son sends his father back in time to save (and inseminate) his mother, wonderfully combines the insights of the greatest Austrian-American mind, Gödel, with the talents of the greatest Austrian-American body, Arnold Schwarzenegeger.)"

Unilluminating section life outside the solar system. If there is no other intelligent life, than human life (!) is of cosmic significance; if there is other intelligent life, than human life is not of cosmic significance. The nature of this significance (either way) isn't particularly clear. Just because unique, this does not mean that the universe (=cosmic) suffers from the lack of it.

170: "Is it worth taking precautions to ensure that whatever may happen, something survives of humanity? Most of us care about the future, not just because of a personal concern with children and grandchildren, but because all our efforts would be devalued if they were not part of a continuing process, if they did not have consequences that resonated into the far future."

Seems to suggest that the essence of humanity is narcissism. He might not be wrong, but this is clearly not what he means.

170:  "It would be absurd to claim that emigration into space is an answer to the population problem, or that more than a tiny fraction of those on Earth will themselves ever leave it. If some disaster reduced humanity to a far lower population, living in primitive conditions in a devastated wasteland, the survivors would still find Earth's environment more hospitable than that of any other planet. Nonetheless, even a few pioneering groups, living independently of Earth, would offer a safeguard against the worst possible disaster--the foreclosure of intelligent life's future through the extinction of all humankind."

183:  "The first aquatic creatures crawled onto dry land in the Silurian era, more than three hundred million years ago. They may have been unprepossessing brutes, but had they been clobbered, the evolution of land-based fauna would have been jeopardised. Likewise, the post-human potential is so immense that not even the most misanthropic amongst us would countenance its being foreclosed by human actions."

Not even!



